The Project Gutenberg EBook of Manor, by Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Manor

Author: Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

Release Date: March 18, 2011 [EBook #35605]

Language: German

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANOR ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [ Anmerkung zur Transkription:

    Schreibweise und Interpunktion des Originaltextes wurden übernommen.
  ]




  KARL HEINRICH ULRICHS

  MANOR

  Nachdruck der 1914 als Wegwalt-Druck Nr. 3
  erschienenen Ausgabe für Freunde des
  Verlags rosa Winkel aus Anlaß
  des 100. Todestages von
  Karl Heinrich Ulrichs
  und des 20jährigen
  Bestehens des
  Verlags rosa
  Winkel
  Berlin
  1995




Die vorliegende kleine Novelle »Manor« von K. H. Ulrichs wurde als
Wegwalt-Druck Nr. 3 Ende Januar 1914 in 1200 Exemplaren ausgegeben.
Davon wurden 200 Exemplare als Vorzugsausgabe auf Japan-Papier gedruckt
und im Interesse der Bücherliebhaber handschriftlich numeriert. Die
Herstellung geschah in der Kunstdruckerei Emil Nagel Nachf. zu Berlin
SW 68, Lindenstr. 105. * Den Verlag besorgte die WEGWALT-WERKSTATT
WILHELMSHAGEN




Mitten im nördlichen Ocean liegt eine Gruppe von 35 Inseln, einsam und
verlassen, gleich fern von Schottland, Island und Norwegen, die Faröer
genannt; öde, felsig, wolkenumschleiert, durchtönt vom schwermutsvollen
Geschrei flatternder Möwen und Kieren, umrauscht von brandenden Wogen,
fast stets in Nebel gehüllt. Im Sommer Bergesgipfel, 1800 und 2000 Fuß
über dem Meere; rauhe Felsen; düstere Schluchten; Tannenurwälder;
tausende von Quellen, die sich oft aus großer Höhe tosend und schäumend
hinabstürzen von Block zu Block. Die Ufer tiefeingeschnitten von Buchten
und Fjorden; fast überall unnahbar von hohen Felsen umsäumt. Das Meer
klippenvoll ringsum; hie und da gänzlich verrammelt; beunruhigt von
Wasserwirbeln; von wilden Strömungen durchwogt. Nur 17 sind bewohnt.
Strömö und Wagö trennt nur ein schmaler Sund; durchschwimmbar; freilich
gehört ein kühner Schwimmer dazu. Mancher Ortsname erinnert an die Zeit,
da auf den Färöern noch keine Kirchen standen und der alte Glaube noch
nicht vertrieben war, z. B. Thorshavn an der Küste von Strömö, d. i.
Strominsel.

In jenen Tagen ruderte von Strömö ein Fischer mit seinem 15jährigen
Sohne ins offene Meer hinaus. Es erhob sich ein Sturm; das Boot schlug
um; in den Klippen von Wagö warf es den Sohn. Das sah auf Wagö ein
junger Schiffer. Sprang in die Wellen, schwamm zwischen die Klippen,
ergriff den treibenden Körper, zog ihn ans Land. Setzte sich mit ihm auf
einen Block; hegte den Halberstarrten auf seinen Knieen in den Armen. Da
schlug dieser die Augen auf.

Schiffer: »Wie heißt Du?«

Knabe: »Har; ich bin von Strömö«.

Ruderte ihn über den Sund nach Strömö zurück; brachte ihn zu Lära,
seiner Mutter. Dankbar umschlang beim Abschied der Knabe den Hals seines
Retters. Der Vater ward als Leiche von den Wellen ans Land gespült. Der
Schiffer hieß Manor. War elternlos, vier Jahre älter als Har. Hatte ihn
lieb gewonnen. Sehnte sich, ihn wiederzusehen. Ruderte nun bisweilen
hinüber nach Strömö, oder durchschwamm die lauwarmen Wellen, da der
Sommer kam, abends wenns Tagewerk vollbracht. Har ging ans Ufer, erklomm
eine Klippe, schwenkte sein Tuch, wenn er von weitem Manors Nachen
kommen sah. Blieben dann beisammen ein oder zwei Stunden lang. Ruderten
hinaus bei ruhiger See und sangen Matrosenlieder. Oder entkleideten
sich, tauchten in die Wellen, schwammen zur nahen Sandbank, die
gegenüber lag; und die Robben entflohen, die dort auf dem Sande sich
sonnten. Oder gingen in den dunkelgrünen Wald hoher Tannen, deren
rauschende Wipfel die Sprache Tors verkündeten, oder setzten sich unter
die Zweige einer alten Buche auf einen Stein. Plauderten; machten Pläne.
Kommt einmal ein Schiff, das auf den Walfischfang segle, dann wollten
sie beide mit. Und saßen sie so auf dem Stein, dann legte Manor seinen
Arm um Hars Schultern und nannte ihn: »Min Jong«; und dem Knaben war
nicht wohler, als wenn Manor ihn so umschlungen hielt. War es schon
spät, wenn er kam, dann ging er leise bis an den Fliederbusch, der Hars
Fenster beschattete, und klopfte an die Scheiben. Har erwachte und stahl
sich zu ihm hinaus. Fühlte sich so glücklich, konnte er bei Manor sein.




II.


Da kam ein dänischer Dreimaster, ankerte in Wagö's sicherer Bucht,
suchte Matrosen für eine Fahrt von zwei Monaten zum Walfischfang. Manor
ging an Bord. Den schlankgewachsnen jugendfrischen Burschen nahm der
Kapitän sogleich an. Har wollte mit als Schiffsjunge. Lära aber sagte
jammernd: »Bist mein einzig Kind! Deinen Vater verschlang mir die See.
Du willst mich verlassen?« Har blieb. Manor ging. Das Schiff lichtete
die Anker.

Zwei Monate waren verflossen. Es ward schon wieder winterlich. Har
bestieg die Klippe, schaute in die Ferne, sah eines Morgens das Schiff
kommen, schwenkte freudig das Tuch. Doch es war stürmisch; die Brandung
ging hoch. Es steuerte auf die Bucht von Wagö zu. Konnte Wagö nicht
erreichen, ward verschlagen in die gefährlichen Riffe von Strömö,
strandete vor Hars Augen. Er sah, wie die Schiffbrüchigen mit den Wellen
kämpften. Erblickte einen unter ihnen, der mit kräftigem Arm eine Planke
ergriff, im nächsten Augenblick aber samt Planke in den Strudel der
Brandung hinabgeschlürft ward. Er kannte ihn. Es war Manor.

Viel Leichen trieb die Flut ans Land. Man breitete Stroh auf den Strand,
legte sie darauf, Leiche an Leiche. Har half mit, musterte die
niedergelegten. Da brachte man auch Manors Leiche, legte sie auf das
Stroh. Lag nun vor ihm da mit nassem Haar, aus dem Seewasser emportroff,
geschlossenen Augen, kalt, mit erblaßten Lippen und bleichen Wangen, aus
denen das Blut gewichen, schlank von Gestalt, im Tode noch schön
anzuschaun. »So also, Manor, muß ich dich wiedersehen!« rief er aus,
warf sich schluchzend über den geliebten Körper und kostete noch einen
Augenblick die Wonne der Umarmung.

Man brachte die Leichen über den Sund; begrub sie noch an demselben Tage
in den Sanddünen von Wagö.




III.


Am Abend saß Har in der Hütte düster und stumm. Lära wollte ihn trösten.
Er aber wollte keinen Trost; er fluchte den Göttern. Ging zu Bett.
Konnte nicht einschlafen. Gegen Mitternacht verfiel er in Halbschlummer.

Da weckte ihn ein Geräusch. Er schaute auf. Es war draußen am Fenster.
Die Zweige des Fliederstrauchs knickten sich und es raschelte in seinen
trocknen Blättern. Das Fenster ward geöffnet; eine Gestalt stieg herein.
Ha! Er kannte die Gestalt! Trotz der Dunkelheit hatte er sie sogleich
erkannt! Langsamen Schritts kam sie heran; legte sich zu ihm ins Bett;
er zitterte; aber er wehrte ihr nicht. Streichelte ihm die Wangen, aber
mit kalter Hand, o! so kalt, so kalt! Ihn durchschauerte Fieberfrost.
Küßte den warmen schwellenden Knabenmund mit eiskalten Lippen. Er fühlte
des Küssenden nasses Gewand; nasses Haar hing auf die Stirn ihm herab.
Ihn durchfuhr ein Grauen. Aber es war mit Wonne gemischt. Die Gestalt
seufzte. Ihm klang's, als wolle sie sagen:

»Mich trieb die Sehnsucht her zu Dir! Ich finde nicht Ruhe im Grab!«

Er wagte nicht zu sprechen. Zu atmen wagte er kaum. Und schon erhob sich
die Gestalt. Seufzte als wollte sie sagen:

»Nun muß ich wieder zurück!« Erstieg die Fensterbank; entfernte sich wie
sie gekommen.

»Manor ist dagewesen«, sagte Har leise vor sich hin.

In derselben Nacht war ein Fischer von Strömö draußen im Sund mit seinem
Boot. Es leuchtete die See. Von seinem Ruder troffen schimmernde Funken
herab. Da, kurz vor Mitternacht, hörte er seltsames Rauschen. Sah, wie
etwas hindurchschoß durch die leuchtenden Wellen, etwas, dessen Gestalt
er nicht unterschied, mit der Geschwindigkeit eines großen Fisches, in
der Richtung auf Strömö. Ein Fisch war es nicht, so viel konnte er im
Dunkel erkennen.

In nächster Nacht kam Manor wieder, eiskalt wie gestern, doch
verlangender. Umschlang den Knaben mit kalten Armen; küßte ihm Wange und
Mund; legte den Kopf ihm auf die weiche Brust. Har erbebte. Ihm fing das
Herz zu pochen an bei dieser innigen Umschlingung. Und gerade auf das
pochende Herz legte Manor den Kopf. Die Lippen suchten den sanft
schwellenden Hügel über dem Herzen, der durch das Pochen mit in Bewegung
geriet. Dort begann er zu saugen, verlangend und dürstend, wie ein
Säugling an Mutterbrust. Doch schon nach wenigen Augenblicken ließ er
nach; erhob sich; entfernte sich. Har war zu Mut, als ob ein saugendes
Tier sich an ihm vollgesogen.

Auch in dieser Nacht hatte der Fischer wieder im Sunde zu tun. Genau um
dieselbe Stunde wie gestern kams wieder herangerauscht. Kam diesmal nah
an ihm vorüber. Im blassen Mondlicht konnte er erkennen: es war ein
schwimmender Mensch. Schwamm auf der rechten Seite liegend, wie
bisweilen Matrosen schwimmen, aber bekleidet mit einem Totenhemd. Ihn
schien der Schwimmer gar nicht zu bemerken, obgleich er das Gesicht ihm
zugekehrt hielt.

Schwamm mit geschlossenen Augen. Der Anblick war ihm so befremdend, daß
er seine ausgespannten Netze einzog und wegruderte.

Auch in den nächsten Nächten kam Manor wieder. Umarmte den Knaben
bisweilen im Schlaf. Denn hin und wieder überkam ihn Schlaf, bis Manor
kam. Erwachte dann in seiner Umarmung. Jedesmal suchten die Lippen die
weiche Erhöhung über dem Herzen. War es Tag geworden, so sah Har dann
und wann, wie aus der linken Brustwarze ihm noch ein schwaches Tröpflein
Blut hervorperlte. Wischte es mit dem Hemde weg. War auch wohl schon von
selbst ein Tröpflein ins Hemd gelaufen. Nur in der Vollmondnacht kam er
nicht.

Ein Toter ist oft mächtig erfüllt von Sehnsucht nach einem oder dem
anderen unter seinen zurückgelassenen Lieben, so mächtig, daß er Nachts
das Grab verläßt und zu ihm kommt. Denn das ist alter Glaube, daß Urda
manchem um Mitternacht kurzes Halbleben zurückgibt und dann seltsame
Kräfte von jenseit des Grabes verleiht. Kommt besonders vor bei jungen
Leuten, die in der Blüte der Jahre der bittere Tod hinwegraffte. Den
Zurückkehrenden erfüllt zugleich große Blut- und Wärmebedürftigkeit.
Dann lechzt er nach dem frischen Blut der Lebenden und, wie ein
Liebender, nach Umarmungen. Aber er teilt auch große Sehnsucht mit und
bereitet dadurch oft heftige Qual.

So auch hier. Har quälte sich den ganzen Tag und härmte sich. Mit
Ungeduld aber erwartete er die Nacht und ersehnte die wonnigen Schauer
der mitternächtigen Umarmung.




IV.


So mochten zwölf Tage vergangen sein.

Lära: »Bist so bleich und so blaß. Was ist Dir, Har?«

Er: »Nichts, Mutter.«

Sie: »Bist so still.«

Er seufzte. -- -- --

Im letzten Häuschen des Dorfes wohnte eine weise Frau, die allerlei
Geheimnisse wußte. Zu der ging die besorgte Mutter. Die weise Frau warf
Runenstäbe.

Weise Frau: »Ihn besuchen die Toten.«

Lära: »Die Toten?«

Weise Frau: »Ja, des Nachts; und daran muß einer sterben, wenn dem
Besuch nicht bei Zeiten Einhalt geschieht, eh es zu spät ist.«

Bestürzt kehrte Lära heim.

Sie: »Ists wahr, Har, bekommst Du Totenbesuch?«

Er blickte zu Boden. »Manor ist dagewesen,« sagte er leise und sank ihr
weinend an die Brust.

Sie: »So mögen dir die Götter gnädig sein!«

Er: »Die Götter? Pah! Was sollen mir jetzt noch die Götter! Als er sich
an die Planke klammerte, o weh! o weh! da war es Zeit, mir gnädig zu
sein, wenn sie es wollten. Aber erbarmungslos ließen sie ihn versinken.
Wie hab ich ihn so lieb gehabt!« -- --

Nun bemerkte sie auch die Blutspuren in seinem Hemde. Da ging sie zu den
Dorfältesten. Diese ruderten hinüber nach Wagö mit Mutter und Sohn, auch
die weise Frau nahmen sie mit. Zu den Wagöern sagten sie:

»Eure Gräber schließen nicht. Einer verläßt sein Grab jede Nacht; kommt
herüber zu uns; saugt sich voll am Blut dieses Knaben.«

Die Wagöer: »So wollen wir ihn festmachen.«

Griffen einen tannenen Pfahl, manneslang und mehr als armesdick, den sie
mit einem Beil viereckig behieben, unten fußlang zugespitzt. Gingen zu
den Dünen; einer trug den Pfahl, ein anderer eine schwere Axt. Oeffneten
Manors Grab. Da lag er ruhig und still vor ihnen da im Totenhemd.

Erster Wagöer: »Seht! Er liegt noch so, wie wir ihn hingelegt.«

Weise Frau: »Weil er sich jedesmal wieder in die alte Stellung legt.«

Zweiter Wagöer: »Sein Gesicht ist ja fast frischer als sonst.«

Weise Frau: »Kein Wunder. Dafür ist Hars Gesicht jetzt desto blasser.«

Har stieg hinab und warf sich nochmals über die geliebte Leiche.

»Manor! Manor!« rief er mit angsterfüllter Stimme. »Sie wollen Dich
pfählen. Manor, erwache! Schlage die Augen auf! Dich ruft dein Har!«

Aber er schlug die Augen nicht auf. Regungslos lag er unter Hars
Umarmung, wie vor zwölf Tagen am Strande auf dem Stroh.

Har wollte ihn nicht loslassen. Sie rissen ihn weg. Setzten Manor die
Spitze des Pfahls auf die Brust. Aechzend wandte sich Har. Fiel der
Mutter um den Hals. An ihrer Schulter barg er sein Gesicht.

»Mutter!« rief er aus, »warum hast du mir das getan!«

Die flache Rückseite der Axt hörte er niederfallen auf den Pfahl und den
Pfahl stöhnen. Ein schwerer Schlag; noch ein Schlag und noch ein halb
Dutzend Schläge.

Erster Wagöer: »Nun ist er festgemacht!«

Zweiter: »Das Wiederkommen soll er nun wohl bleiben lassen.«

Har trugen sie halb ohnmächtig davon. »Nun wird er dich in Ruhe lassen,
mein liebes Kind!« sagte Lära, da sie wieder in ihrer Hütte waren.

Betrübt ging er zu Bett. »Nun kommt er nicht mehr!« sagte er kummervoll
vor sich hin. War müde und matt. Friedlos aber und ruhelos wälzte er
sich auf seinem Lager. Langsam schlichen die Minuten; träg krochen die
Stunden dahin. Mitternacht kam und noch kein Schlaf hatte sich über
seine Wimpern gesenkt.

Horch! Was ist das? Im Fliederbaum ... -- Doch nein; das war ja
unmöglich. Und doch! Wieder, wie früher, raschelte es in den Zweigen des
Baums. Das Fenster öffnete sich. Manor war wieder da. Seufzte tief auf.
Hatte eine große Wunde in der Brust, die viereckig war und ihm bis durch
den Rücken ging. Legte sich wieder zu Har, umschlang ihn und sog. Sog
verlangender denn zuvor und dürstender.

Nebenan aber wachte diese Nacht Lära; horchte und zitterte. Früh morgens
kam sie herein und trat an Hars Bett.

Sie: »Mein armes Kind! Er ist doch wieder dagewesen.«

Er: »Ja, Mutter; er ist wieder bei mir gewesen.«

Das Bett aber war befleckt mit Leichenblut, das aus der großen Wunde
hervorgeträufelt war.




V.


Einige Stunden später ruderte wieder ein Boot über den Sund; doch ohne
Har. Man ging wieder zu den Dünen; öffnete wieder das Grab. Der
viereckige Pfahl steckte noch in der Gruft, doch nicht mehr in Manors
Brust. Aber er lag gekrümmt neben dem Pfahl. Gestreckt zu liegen
hinderte der Pfahl.

Weise Frau: »Er hat sich los machen können. Der Pfahl ist ja unten und
oben gleich dick.«

Erster Wagöer: »Hat sich von unten nach oben am Pfahl in die Höhe
gewunden.«

Zweiter: »Muß ihn aber unmenschliche Anstrengung gekostet haben.«

Auf Rat der weisen Frau behieben sie heute einen stärkeren Pfahl, den
sie oben doppelt so dick ließen als unten, daß er aussah wie ein Nagel
mit Kopf. Zogen den alten Pfahl weg und pfählten ihn mit diesem.

»So! Nun ist er angenagelt«, sagte der Axtmann, als er dem Pfahl den
letzten Hieb auf den Kopf gegeben.

Zweiter Wagöer: »Mag er sich winden und drehn, von dem windet er sich
nicht los.«

Lära kehrte zu Har zurück; erzählte was geschehn. »Nun ist es vorbei«,
sagte er zu sich selbst, da er zu Bett ging. Schlummerlos lag er da.
Mitternacht kam. Doch alles blieb still. Nichts raschelte draußen am
Fenster in den Zweigen des Fliederstrauchs. Kein Schwimmer schreckte den
Fischer mehr, der Nachts mit geschlossenen Augen des Sundes Woge
durchschnitt.

Lära: »Nun hast du Frieden vor ihm. Er hat dich so gequält.«

Er: »O Mutter! Mutter! Er hat mich nicht gequält!«

Härmte sich ab in vergeblichem Sehnen. »Mutter!« sagte er, »nun ists aus
mit mir.« Zehrte ab; konnte sich nicht mehr vom Bett erheben.

Sie: »Bist so müde und so matt, mein lieber Sohn!«

Er: »Er zieht mich zu sich hinab.«

Eines Morgens saß sie an seinem Bett, da er noch schlief. Ein Monat war
verflossen seit dem Schiffbruch. Es war noch früh. Sie weinte. Da schlug
er die Augen auf.

»Mutter«, sagte er mit schwacher Stimme, »ich muß sterben.«

Sie: »O nein, mein Kind! Du sollst so jung nicht sterben!«

Er: »Doch, doch! Er ist wieder bei mir gewesen. Wir haben mit einander
geredet. Wir saßen auf dem Stein unter der alten Buche im Wald wie
sonst; er schlang seinen Arm wieder um meinen Hals und nannte mich »Min
Jong«. Heut Nacht will er wieder kommen und mich holen. Er hat es mir
versprochen. Ich kann es nicht aushalten ohne ihn.«

Sie beugte sich über ihn und ihre Tränen flossen reichlich auf sein
Bett. »Mein armes Kind!« sagte sie und legte ihm ihre Hand auf die
Stirn.

Als es Nacht ward, zündete sie eine Lampe an und wachte bei ihm am
Bette. Still lag er da; schlief nicht; schaute schweigend vor sich hin.

Er: »Mutter!«

Sie: »Was willst Du, mein guter Sohn?«

Er: »Legt mich mit in sein Grab! Ja? Und zieht ihm den schrecklichen
Pfahl aus der Brust!«

Sie versprach es ihm mit Händedruck und Kuß.

Er: »O, bei ihm muß es sich so süß liegen im Grabe!« -- --

Da kam Mitternacht heran. Auf einmal verklärten sich seine Züge. Hob ein
wenig den Kopf, als horche er. Mit glänzenden Augen schaute er nach dem
Fenster und nach den Zweigen des Fliederbaums.

»Sieh, Mutter, da kommt er!« -- --

Das waren seine letzten Worte. Da brachen ihm die Augen.

Sank in die Kissen zurück und entschlief.

Und sie taten, wie er gebeten.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Manor, by Karl Heinrich Ulrichs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANOR ***

***** This file should be named 35605-8.txt or 35605-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/0/35605/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
